# Typescript (TS) Notes

In the following type-name means "basic type like number or string" or name of a defined type.

## Installing, configuring and compiling TS

TS installation: `npm install -g typscript ts-node`

After installation the `tsc` command is used to compile .ts files. Compiling app.ts: `tsc app.ts`

Auto compiling single file app.ts: `tsc app.ts --watch` or `tsc app.ts -w`

### TS Compiler Configuration (tsconfig.json)

For auto-compiling all TS files in a project and to use other TS compiler configurations we need to initialize the project for TS.

To initialize a project for TS: `tsc --init`

This will create 'tsconfig.json' configuration file which has a large number of settings with good defaults.

After tsconfig.json is created we can use following commands:

For compiling all .ts files once: just `tsc`

For auto-compiling .ts files: `tsc --watch` or `tsc -w`

The tsconfig.json is consists of `"option name" : option value `, where value can be primitive or array. By default TS uses default values for various configuration options. We can add more settings after/before that. Following are some:

`"exclude": [files or paths]` where value of setting is an array of files or paths to be excluded (i.e. these .ts files will not be compiled).
we don't need to use exclude but if we do we should add at least "nod_modules" in the array like. if exclude is not added then node_modules are excluded by default.
`"exclude": ["node_modules"]`
"include": [] is an array of files or paths to be included.

The tsc command compiles [includes] minus [excludes] .ts files, so [excludes] filters the includes files/folder

In general tsc use default values for most of the settings in tsconfig.json if we do not set them ourselves
**but if we do set a setting which has an array as value then its default is gone and we are responsible to set all needed values in the array.**

With vscode's "Debugger for Chrome" we can debug a code right in vscode (instead of (or in addition to) browsers chrome devtools)

The `.d.ts` file is generated by the tsc command, it is a TypeScript Declaration file. While compiling a .ts, the compiler can strip all the type information and store it in this declaration file. The generated .js file (JavaScript file) will not contain any TS specific information.

## TS Concepts

In general TS implicitly infer a variable type based on initial assigned value e.g. for "let x = 5" TS assumes type is "number".

Or the coder can explicitly assign a type to a variable via "_type annotation_" which is like `variable: type-name` e.g.:
`let name: string`; or `let age: number`; etc. Note it is variable name followed by a colon followed by a space followed by type-name (VCST).

### Functions Typing

Function parameters type annotation is exactly same as for any other variable.
For function return type annotation place colon+space+type-name(CST) after closing(right) parenthesis.

```typescript
function sumTwoNumbers(num1: number, num2: number): string {
return `result is ${num1+num2}`;
}
and for arrow function it is very similar:

let sum = (x: number, y: number): number => {
return x + y;
}

```

Anonymous functions are a little bit different from function declarations. When a function appears in a place where TypeScript can determine how it’s going to be called, the parameters of that function are automatically given types.

### Type-Inference and Contextual Typing

In the following example no type annotations are given, but TypeScript can spot the bug using contextual typing for the anonymous function.

```typescript
const names = ["Alice", "Bob", "Eve"];
names.forEach(function (s) {
  console.log(s.toUppercase());
  // TS give following error
  // Property 'toUppercase' does not exist on type 'string'. Did you mean 'toUpperCase'?
});
```

the above is called "contextual typing" as TS infers types from context.

In general Typscript tries to infer types in most cases. If inference is not possible it assign "any" type.
But if `noImplicitAny = true` flag is set then it generate an error.

TS raises an error if a variable type is established (via inference or explicit annotation ) and later in the code the type of variable is apparently changes somehow.

an "assertion" about a value is an explicit casting of type using "as + space + type-name";

Non-null Assertion Operator (Postfix "!") asserts that the value is neither "null" nor "undefined"

"narrowing" means using "if", "else if" or "else" block. It helps ts in reconciling types with corresponding methods or operations.

### Combining Types:

Union Type:

let numOrStr: number|string = 55;

TS will only allow an operation if it is valid for every member of the union. For example, if you have the union string | number, you can’t use methods that are only available on string:

The solution is to narrow the union with code, the same as you would in JavaScript without type annotations. Narrowing occurs when TypeScript can deduce a more specific type for a value based on the structure of the code.

For example, TypeScript knows that only a string value will have a typeof value "string":

```typescript
function printId(id: number | string) {
  if (typeof id === "string") {
    // In this branch, id is of type 'string'
    console.log(id.toUpperCase());
  } else {
    // Here, id is of type 'number'
    console.log(id);
  }
}
```

Sometimes you’ll have a union where all the members have something in common. For example, both arrays and strings have a slice method. If every member in a union has a property in common, you can use that property without narrowing:

### Type Aliases

A "type alias" is a name for any type. The syntax for a type alias is "type typename = type definition":
type definition can be as simple as basic type like "number" or a a "combined type" (like unions etc.)
Below Point is defined as an object type
type Point = {
x: number;
y: number;
z?: number;
};

then we can use Point any place we wanted "{x: number; y: number; z: number}" .
note that the question mark in "z?" means that z is optional. The TS will not raise error if it does not see z in Point type objects.

### Interface

An "interface" in TS is an object-like set of "key:type" pairs. Conventionally interface name start with an upper case.:
(An interface declaration is another way to name an object type like Type aliases)

interface User {
name: string;
id: number;
}

note that each key:type pair is separated by ";" while in an object "," is used to separate entries. Although you may also use "," in object type definition as separator. But it is good practice to use ";" to show that it a type not the object.

Now User becomes a type (like number , string) and can be used with any object variable after a colon and space.

const user: User = {
name: "Hayes",
id: 0,
};

To add new field (ke/type) pair in an interface we use the following:
interface User {
age: 35;
}

Type aliases and interface are very similar. Note the following though:

You can not add new fields to a type alias once it is defined.But for interface you can as in User above.
Interface is mainly for objects but type aliases are more general
to extend interface we use "extends":
interface NewInterface extends OldInterface {
newProp: type-name
}
to extend a type alias for an object we use "&" :
type NewType = OldType & {
newProp: type-name
}

For objects typing, it is highly recommended to use 'interface' not 'type alias'.

### Array Type

To declare an array type simply add "[]" to type-name like const arr1: number[]; declares that arr1 is an array of numbers.
Another way for array type is to use Array before type-name in angle brackets. like Array<string> .

### Type Assertion

is explicit casting of the type of a variable based on coder's knowledge about that variable (which TS can't infer).
type assertion is very simple: just use "variable as type-name"
TS does a lot of inferring about types all across a TS code based on its knowledge about JS constructs and even DOM nodes type and DOM methods return variables higher level types. But it still would not know the specific type of these variables. For example, if you’re using document.getElementById, TypeScript only knows that this will return some kind of HTMLElement, but you might know that your page will always have an HTMLCanvasElement with a given ID. In this situation, you can use a type assertion to specify a more specific type:

const myCanvas = document.getElementById("main_canvas") as HTMLCanvasElement;

Note that because of TS's DOM support you also have DOM related variable types such as HTMLCanvasElement available to be specified. In other words type-names or type types (no pun intended) are not limited to "number", "string" etc.

TS only allows type assertions which convert to a more specific or less specific version of a type. This rule prevents “impossible” coercions like:

const x = "hello" as number; (will give an error)

### Literal Types

Type could be any literal or any union or any array of literals. In that case the variable's domain space is limited to these literals. Single literal type is not useful because you can simulate it by using "const" instead of "var" or "let". However union or array of literal provide many uses.
Union of literals type is very useful because it checks for if a variable has a values from a specified set of values.

let color: "red"|"blue"|"green"; (will only allow these colors)

To declare an object's property as literal (not changeable) you use "as value" assertion.

const employee = {name: "john", company: "Microsoft" as "Microsoft"}

this is a tedious way, you basically repeat the property value.Soto declare an object's all properties as literal you can use the assertion suffix "as const"

const john = {name: "john", company:"Microsoft"} as const;

In JS null means variable is "absent" while undefined means variable is there but is "un-initialized"

In TS with strictNullChecks "on", when a value is null or undefined, you will need to test for those values before using methods or properties on that value. Just like checking for undefined before using an optional property, we can use narrowing to check for values that might be null:

when you know for sure that a variable can’t be null or undefined you can use non-null assertion postfix "!" after that variable, then TS will not raise any warning even without narrowing (narrowing means checks ("if blacks") null or undefined) e.g. console.log(x!.toFixed()); here the coder tells TS that x will not be null/undefined so please don't yell.

### enum Type:

Almost all of the additional typing-related code that is written to an otherwise JS code will be removed after TS compilation. TS's enum is an exception.  
Enums are a feature added to JavaScript by TypeScript which allows for describing a value which could be one of a set of possible named constants. Unlike most TypeScript features, this is not a type-level addition to JavaScript but something added to the language and runtime.

## Narrowing and Type Guards:

TS analyzes JS constructs like "if/elseif" etc. and if these checks provide paths for allowable types then TS regards these checks paths as "type guard" and does not raise warnings.

The process of refining types to more specific types than declared via "type guards" (or conditional blocks of code) is called "narrowing". In many editors(including vscode) we can observe these types as they change,

```typescript
function padLeft2(padding: number | string, input: string) {
  if (typeof padding === "number") {
    return " ".repeat(padding) + input;
  }
  return padding + input;
}
```

In the above example padding can take 2 types of values number or string. Without

In JS constructs which expect boolean arguments like "if" (and logical && and || etc.) first “coerce” their conditions to booleans to make sense of them, and then choose their branches depending on whether the result is true or false. There are only few values that evaluate to false. These are 0, NaN, "" (the empty string), 0n (the bigint version of zero), null and undefined. All other values (including empty arrays) evaluate to true.
following JS/TS constructs (types of statements or expressions) help in "narrowing"

- assignment statements
- in and instanceOf operators
- Truthiness
- Equality
- control flow analysis

In the above 'narrowing' is handled with existing JavaScript constructs, however sometimes you want more direct control over how types change throughout your code.

To define a user-defined type guard, we simply need to define a function whose return type is a "type predicate":

```typescript
type Fish = { swim: () => void };
type Bird = { fly: () => void };
declare function getSmallPet(): Fish | Bird;
function isFish(pet: Fish | Bird): pet is Fish {
  return (pet as Fish).swim !== undefined;
}
// ---cut---
// Both calls to 'swim' and 'fly' are now okay.
let pet = getSmallPet();

if (isFish(pet)) {
  pet.swim();
} else {
  pet.fly();
}
```

Note that isFish() return type in the JS code should be a boolean (and it will be on code execution ) but in the TS layer it is annotated as "pet is Fish". This "pet is Fish" is a "type predicate". You may think that boolean true from isFish is equivalent of narrowing pet's type to Fish from a union of Fish|Bird/
Also, classes can use "this is Type" to narrow their type
