# D3 Notes

## Selections in D3

- `d3.create("namespace:name")` creates and returns a `single-element selection` containing a detached element of the given name in the current document. default namespace is HTML.

- `d3.creator(name)` returns a function which creates an element of the given name, assuming that this is the parent element. This method is used internally by selection.append and selection.insert to create new elements. `selection.append("div")` is equivalent to `selection.append(d3.creator("div"))`

- In d3 we `select` DOM's HTML or SVG elements by using `object.select("selector")` and `object.selectAll(("selector"))`

- `d3.select("selector")` and `d3.selectAll(("selector"))` are top level `select()`they select from entire `document`

- Sub-selection (selecting from The a selection) methods, `selection.select()` and `selection.selectAll()`, only match from the selection not entire document.

- `selector` is `W3C selector strings` and can be element types like `div`, `rect` etc. or it can be element id `#rect1` or class name like `.blue-table` etc. It can be an attribute as well `input[type=checkbox]`.

- `selector` can also be a variable (refrence to an already selected selection) including `this` in an event listner.

  example one HTML element: `var selection = d3.select("body");`
  example all h2 elements: `var selection = d3.selectAll("h2");`

- The returned object of `d3.select()` and `d3.selectAll()` is called `selection`

- Selection methods set attributes, styles, properties, HTML or text content, and more. They either return the current selection, or a new selection

- Because data type of the returned value of a selection method is also a selection, selection methods can be chained a following:
  ```js
  d3.selectAll("h2").attr("class", "sub-head").style("color", "blue");
  ```
- Selections are immutable. All selection methods that affect which elements are selected (or their order) return a new selection. However, elements within a selection are mutable.

- The `selection` returned by `d3.select()` and `d3.selectAll()` is an `object` with `_groups` and `_parents` properties and accessor methods.

- The `_groups` property is an `array` with one or more elements. These elements are groups. Groups have HTML/SVG elements.

- So it like selection(an object) ---> `_groups`(an array) ---> group(an array of HTML/SVG elements) ---> HTML/SVG element(s)

- The `_groups` of the selection obtained from `d3.select()` or `d3.selectAll()` can have zero or precisely "one" group.

- The difference between `d3.select()` and `d3.selectAll()` is that the only group in `_groups` returned by `d3.select` can have zero or 1 element, while such group in `_groups` returned by `d3.selectAll` can have zero or more elements.

- `select(selecter)` selects the first element that matches the specified selector string. If no elements match the selector, returns an empty selection.

- While accessing a node directly is supported by D3’s API, it is more common to use `selection.node`.

- The only way for to obtain a selection with multiple groups is `selection.selectAll` (not `d3.selectAll`). For example, for a table with n-rows and m-cells in each row, if you select all table rows and then select the rows’ cells, you’ll get a group of sibling cells for each row:

  `d3.selectAll("tr").selectAll("td");`

- With subsequent `selectAll` (not `select`), every element in the old selection becomes a group in the new selection. Only `selectAll` has this special behavior regarding grouping; `select` preserves the existing grouping.

- The `select` method must preserve the grouping structure, so it fills the missing slots with null.

- `d3.selection()` selects the root element, `document.documentElement`. This function can also be used to test for selections (`instanceof d3.selection`) or to extend the selection prototype. For example, to add a method to check checkboxes:

```js
d3.selection.prototype.checked = function (value) {
  return arguments.length < 1
    ? this.property("checked")
    : this.property("checked", !!value);
};
```

## Join in D3

- When joining elements to data by key, there are three possible logical outcomes:

  1. Update - There was a matching element for a given datum.(element will be updated)
  2. Enter - There was no matching element for a given datum. (element will be created)
  3. Exit - There was no matching datum for a given element. (element will be deleted)

These are the three selections returned by `selection.data`, `selection.enter` and `selection.exit`, respectively.

- Using a key with the data the selection matches the data, however, the elements are not automatically reordered in the DOM. For that you must call `selection.order` or `selection.sort` .

- While `update` and `exit` are normal selections, `enter` is a subclass of selection. This is necessary because it represents elements that do not yet exist.
  An `enter` selection contains "placeholders" rather than DOM elements; these placeholders are simply objects with a **data** property.
  The implementation of `enter.select` is then specialized such that nodes are inserted into the group’s parent, replacing the placeholder.
  This is why it is critical to call `selection.selectAll` prior to a data `join`: it establishes the parent node for entering elements.

To reduce duplicate code, `enter.append` has a convenient side-effect:
it replaces null elements in the update selection with the newly-created elements from the `enter selection` .
Thus, after `enter.append`, the update selection is modified to contain both entering and updating elements.
The update selection subsequently contains all currently-displayed elements: (this does not eliminate the need for `merge()` for non-null elements!)

A common pattern to update data is given in the following updateData custom function.

```js
function updateData(data) {
  var u = d3.select("#content").selectAll("div").data(data);

  u.enter()
    .append("div")
    .merge(u)
    .text(function (d) {
      return d;
    });

  u.exit().remove();
}
```

Conceptually, the `enter` selection’s placeholders are pointers to the parent element (in this example, the document body).
The enter selection is typically only used transiently to append elements, and is often merged with the `update` selection after appending,
such that modifications can be applied to both entering and updating elements.

When `selection.each` is executed, the function that is passed to it is executed once for each element in the selection
and each time it is executed it is passed `d` (the data bound to the element), `i` (the element’s group index),
and nodes (the element’s group.) nodes[i] is used to retrieve the current element in the selection for which the function is being called.

- `selection.join(enter[, update][, exit])` is a convenience method that allows us to process the `enter`, `update`, and `exit` selections with one method call. The `join` method requires at least one argument, but may take three. The first argument may be either a string or a function and the last two must be functions. `join` returns a selection that contains a set of newly appended elements as well as the elements in the update selection.

A typical use of `join()` is simply by using a string containing the element tag to be added to `enter()` selection
(no need to specify functions for update and exit) like `join("div")`. After such call `join("div")` removes all in `exit()`, appends the specified tags to `enter()` and merge them with `update` selection. Then re-order the merged selection in DOM and return the merged selection so that subsequent operations can be done on both enter and update selection simultaneously with one code!

### A Note on data binding

- d3 expects the data to be bound as a one-dimensional array at its highest level. That does not mean that the data needs to be strictly a one-dimensional array of scalers. It can be one-dimensional array of arrays (of whatever dimensions, but usually one-dimensional to make the overall data two-dimensional). The data can also be one-dimensional array of objects of any complexities.

- The main concept is that d3 passes the data to its various functions as elements of the highest level one-dimensional array along with the index of that eelement. For example the data pass to the internal function of `.attr()` method can be:

```js
  .attr("y", function (d, i) {
    // d can be scaler, array of any dimension (usually one) or object of any complexity;
    // use d the data in any manner
  })
```
